When you normalize language like from
the river to the sea, when you normalize
language like globalizing into when you
normalize language like again Israel is
a Nazi state, this create the conditions
in which people feel not just compelled
but almost obligated Lulu to do horrible
things.
[Music]
>> I'm Lulu Garcia Navaro and this is the
interview. I covered the Middle East for
a long time as a foreign correspondent
and I can safely say that this moment is
a moment like no other in my memory.
Here in the US, anti-semitism and how it
relates to criticism of Israel has
become central to debates around free
speech,
>> immigration,
>> no one has a right to a student visa,
>> national security, and fundamentally
what it means to feel safe and welcome
in this country. One of the central
figures in this debate is Jonathan
Greenblat, the head of the
Anti-Defamation League or ADL. Founded
more than 100 years ago, the ADL's
stated mission is to quote stop the
defamation of the Jewish people and to
secure justice and fair treatment to
all. Under Greenblat's decadel long
tenure, the ADL has tracked a
precipitous rise in anti-Semitic
incidents across the country, which is
why I wanted to talk to Jonathan
Greenblat about how he sees this moment.
Thank you. Thank you so much for joining
the interview. I'm so glad you're here
today.
>> Thank you so much for having me, Lou.
>> I want to start with a big question that
I know you think about a lot, which is
what is the situation in your estimation
for Jews in America right now?
>> I think this is a time of great concern
for Jews all over the United States. You
know, at ADL, we track anti-semitism, we
measure attitudes, and we also track
incidents. And we've never really seen a
time like this, at least not in recent
memory. So on the one hand, elevated or
intense anti-semitic attitudes as a
percent of the population have more than
doubled in the last 5 years. And we also
track incidents. What I can tell you is
last year 2024 was the worst year we had
ever recorded in terms of acts of
harassment, vandalism, and violence
directed at Jewish people or Jewish
institutions.
That was the fifth time in the last six
years that we've broken a new record.
And if I look back over the 10 years
since I became ADL CEO, the numbers up
10x where it was when I started on the
job.
>> That's why I wanted to have you here
today because you have been in charge of
the ADL since 2015. And this is a moment
in America where anti-semitism
um is up. It's an increasing problem. is
at the center of our politics. It's at
the center of debates about hate, uh,
free speech, and of course, Israel and
the war in Gaza. I'd like to understand
though, first a little bit about you and
how you came to this work.
>> Sure.
>> Um,
you grew up in Connecticut.
>> It's true.
>> Uh,
>> little town in Connecticut.
>> Yeah. Can you just tell me a little bit
about your experience as a young Jewish
person there? Yeah, I was born in New
Haven and raised in Trumble,
Connecticut, which is a nice but
somewhat nondescript place. There was a
Jewish population, not too big. And you
know, anti-semitism,
I mean, I experienced some of it, right?
I had pennies thrown at me in middle
school. I had comments made to me in
high school by people who I didn't like
and sometimes even friends might say
something like, "Oh, you really jeweed
me down." M
>> so I had comments like that and moments
like that but it was not the foremost
thing in my life. However, I'm the
grandson of a Holocaust survivor from
Germany.
>> All my grandparents were from Europe.
All came to the United States fleeing
persecution, seeking opportunity, you
know, wanting refuge. So for me,
anti-semitism wasn't in the foreground.
It was always in the background, I would
say.
>> Did you grow up with a strong sense of
your Jewish identity? Oh yes. So I grew
up in a home that wasn't overly
religious,
>> but we were very sort of Jewishly
identified. I went to synagogue.
>> I was bar mitzvah.
>> Um grew up in a very Zionist home,
right? Very supportive of the state of
Israel.
>> But for me, being Jewish was always
something I did sort of behind the
scenes at home.
>> It was never part of my public life
until I took this job.
>> Yeah. Uh to do a little bit of your bio,
um after college you worked in both the
public and private sectors. You started
a bottled water company.
>> Yep.
>> Um you worked in tech. Um and then you
went to the Obama administration.
>> Mhm.
>> Um and in 2015, as we mentioned, you
were hired to lead the ADL and you took
over from Abe Foxman who had led that
organization for a long time.
>> It was there for 50 years.
>> For listeners who don't know what the
ADL is, how would you describe it?
So the ADL is the oldest anti-hate
organization in America. It was founded
in 1913 in the wake of the Leo Frank
trial and at the time the United States
Jews suffered from what what we might
characterize today in our vernacular as
systemic discrimination. Couldn't work
in many professions
>> couldn't go to university
>> couldn't go to many universities or
their numbers were you know artificially
kept down. Couldn't get medical
treatment at many institutions.
>> Couldn't buy homes in many places. went
on and on. And in that moment, this man,
Leo Frank, who came from New York, went
down to Atlanta to manage a family
business, was falsely accused of a
crime, the death of a girl who was found
strangled to death in the building that
he managed. Uh, falsely accused, wrongly
convicted, and then ultimately lynched.
He was hung from a tree by a mob.
>> Um, and so in that moment, ADL was
founded. And what's interesting about
the organization is when we were created
again 100 some odd years ago they wrote
a mission statement that we still use
today that ADIA was created to quote
stop the defamation of the Jewish people
and secure justice and fair treatment to
all. So long before theories of
intersectionality or notions of social
justice were prevalent, the founders of
ADL at a time when Jews in this country
were a small minority, still are, but
were, you know, didn't have much
cultural influence, didn't have much
sort of political sanding. These people
thought we will fight for ourselves and
we will fight for others. Jews can only
be safe if everyone is safe.
Um before we get to this moment, I do
want to understand how the organization
has changed over time or not. Um during
your tenure, I looked at the ADL's
annual audit of anti-semitic incidents
for 2016, which as you mentioned is one
of the core functions you track what
anti-semitic incidents are um happening
and how many.
And topping the list at that time was
the rise of the alt-right. Looking
from that period onwards, you start to
see the focus of the audits shift and
one of the things that becomes part of
what you start highlighting is
anti-Israel sentiment in these audits on
the left. Can you explain why that was?
>> Sure. So, first of all, I don't think
the audit has sort of altogether changed
by any stretch of the imagination. Like
I don't agree with that
characterization.
The audit may evolve relative to the
times and circumstances dictate that we
respond to them, but we have a very
rigorous methodological process. I mean,
we are very exacting what we count.
>> So, someone says something happened, we
don't report that. An anti-Israel rally
on its own, we don't count that. We only
count where we can determine with
sufficient conviction
that there was actual anti-semitism. So,
this is very important. I mean, I think
last year we tracked over 5,000
anti-Israel rallies, the majority of
which are not in the audit because we
didn't see evidence of anti-semitism at
them. So, marching down the street and
saying free Palestine is not
anti-semitic. There is this fiction that
ADL or other groups
uh look at every instance where Israel
is criticized and call that
anti-semitism.
That is not the case.
>> I want to absolutely dig into how you
determine this. I I I guess I just meant
what was happening in the culture at
that moment that brought these incidents
to to the forefront. Well, I think one
thing that we start
>> there is a difference from what we saw
earlier
>> and I think there's a difference in the
intensity and the pervasiveness
of this sort of hate where people feel
and again it's sort of a trend of the
last decade last 10 years I think
anti-semitism has been normalized in the
culture and I think people are now
saying things and doing things in public
spaces that just weren't the case so I
would look back at a pivotal point as
2021 on. So there was an Israeli action
in Gaza and suddenly here you had Jewish
people being attacked in broad daylight
in response to that. So I'm not talking
about somebody vandalizing a synagogue
in the middle of the night, although
that's also reprehensible. I'm not
talking about breaking the window of a
kosher restaurant. Again, that's
reprehensible. But like right up the
road from where we are in Time Square, a
Jewish man was savagely beaten in broad
daylight in public. The only thing he
was doing was walking. And so that got
our attention. It seemed like something
had changed. Now, to be clear, like war
is bad. You've covered it. You know it
better than I do. All war is bad.
But it triggered something here, a kind
of open season on Jews that we hadn't
seen before.
>> What do you think the reason for that
was?
>> So I think number one, polarization and
sort of cynicism create an environment
where scapegoating happens and Jews play
this perennial role as the scapegoat.
It's lasted throughout the ages. I think
secondly, Lulu, extremists feel
emboldened. extremists have increasingly
feel emboldened like they can move into
the culture and they don't get called
out. And we see it particularly on the
right where we've seen people with
extreme right-wing views literally in
positions of authority. We've seen it on
the left where people with radical
leftwing views are sort of moving into
again the sort of commentariat as well.
And I think it's very problematic. And I
think number three, social media has
sort of whipped all of this up into a
frenzy. So those things together created
very combustible conditions and I think
that continues to create a very fragile
dangerous environment today.
>> I mean what you're describing of course
only got more intense after
um the events of October 7th, the
atrocities committed in Israel,
>> Israel's response in Gaza, what we've
seen there. Um, it's turbocharged the
debate
both about what anti-semitism is and has
turbocharged anti-semitism itself. When
that happened on October 7th,
understanding all this leadup that you
had seen and been a part of,
>> did you think at that point that what
the ADL was going to be called on to do
would be different or change in some
way?
>> Well, let me explain. I'll tell you what
happened. October the 7th, of course,
was a Saturday and they're six, seven
hours ahead in the Middle East. So, it's
the middle of the night and my phone
rings, very unusual. And I answer the
phone and it's the woman who heads up my
office in Jerusalem and she says,
"Jonathan, I'm in our bomb shelter in
Modí. There's thousands of missiles
being fired at the country." Said,
"They're missiles." And we put on CNN
and there it wasn't even being reported
on CNN yet. So, we were confused. what's
really going on? But it became very
clear because my phone was then buzzing
and buzzing and buzzing that something
really big was going on. So I ended up
going into the office. We all did. And
we were fairly sort of overwhelmed and
stunned. I mean it was terrifying. But
then what happened Lulu is then in the
afternoon we started getting different
kind of reports. I remember getting a
call or a text. It was somewhere here in
the city by NYU of like a rally, like a
pro- Hamas rally that was taking place
where people were cheering what had
happened. And then we started getting
reports of similar things. And then we
started seeing all the tweets, all the
posts, the hang glider emojis, the
people celebrating.
And this was really astonishing.
Meaning
what I had not seen up until that time
was
this like public outpouring of hate. I
think a lot of us in the Jewish
community, you ask like what's going on,
you know, what's the mood? I think
people are still reeling from that
today.
I know I am.
Did you feel like because of the
severity of the reaction that you had to
focus more on Israel and did it change
your perception of of how you had to
sort of look at what was happening here
in America?
>> I wouldn't say that. No. So I wouldn't
say that because what was happening
there meant we had to change our
approach here. No. But what we did have
to start to think about, we hadn't seen
things before, like people graffitiing,
you know, synagogues with free Gaza. We
hadn't seen things before like people
painting red triangles on people's homes
for the audience. The red triangle is a
symbol that kamas uses to target their
victims. We hadn't seen that before. So
to answer your question, it wasn't like,
oh, there's a war over there, therefore
we must change. But what it was was
something is now happening over here and
we've got to be paying attention to this
and trying to understand how did we get
to the place where college students
think it's normal to surround someone
who is wearing a kipah and call them a
baby killer like someone who is simply
identifiably Jewish suddenly being
targeted and victimized by people
claiming you're committing genocide. I
mean, obviously holding Jewish people or
any group of people collectively
responsible
is anti-semitic or again racist or
xenophobic.
The prevalence with which that is
happening here totally astonish me. I
wouldn't have guessed it.
>> I mean, we've seen indisputable acts of
anti-semitic violence. I mean, we have
the fatal shooting of two Israeli
embassy employees in DC, the firebombing
in Colorado in June against peaceful
protesters calling for the release of
the hostages, arson at Pennsylvania
Governor Josh Shapiro's home. So, there
have been many high-profile cases of
violence against Jews in this country,
and that is terrible. There is a debate
that I want to understand a little bit
more your perspective on about
what constitutes anti-semitism in this
country.
>> Yeah. I mean
>> um because we have pro Palestinian
speech, we have criticism of the Israeli
government,
>> we have anti-ionism and we have
anti-semitism.
So how do you distinguish between those?
>> Look, criticism of Israel is not
anti-semitic.
If you're looking for an organization
which criticizes Israeli government,
Israeli politicians, Israeli policies, I
point you to ADL.org because we do it.
There is a robust debate in the Jewish
community and I think you see heated
criticism in the Jewish community of
policies of the Israeli government. when
it crosses a line is when it's not a
criticism of Israeli policy per se,
but we see things like, for example,
number one, the demonization of all
Israeli people. So demonizing an entire
group of people for a policy of
government you don't like, I would say
that's anti-semitism. Mhm.
>> Say secondly,
delegitimizing
the state itself,
its right to exist. And then number
three, double standards. When you use
double standards when you talk about
Israel versus other countries. So when I
see demonization or delegitimization or
double standards, that's where I think
about, huh, is this really criticism of
Israel or is this something else?
>> Now, let's talk about anti-ionism.
And by the way, to talk about
anti-ionism, we talk about Zionism.
Please define it.
>> I'll we'll talk about it. So Zionism is
simply put the right of the Jewish
people to self-determination in their
ancient homeland. That's what it is.
Zionism is essential to the Jewish
tradition. The idea of Jews returning to
Israel,
we've been talking about it since Moses,
literally. Political Zionism is newer,
125 years. But that notion of
self-determination in the homeland
doesn't exclude Palestinians, doesn't
exclude any other group. It's saying
Jews have the right, this sort of
liberation movement to go back to where
they're from.
Anti-Zionism is the belief that Jews do
not have that right. It is an ideology
which is committed to saying we will do
what we can to prevent Jewish
self-determination in their homeland.
Anti-Zionism is an ideology of nealism,
Lulu, which would literally seek to not
just delegitimize but eliminate the
Jewish state. And that's very
problematic.
>> So, you have equated anti-ionism with
anti-semitism.
>> It is. And I will say that in
preparation for this conversation, I
talked to a lot of different people and
one of the things I heard um is that
anti-ionism for them is a desire to have
the rights of Palestinians be equal to
the rights of Jews in Israel and the
Palestinian territories. The idea of
sort of, I guess, the one-state
solution, if you will.
Is that definition of anti-ionism to you
anti-semitic?
>> Well, look, if you believe that only
Jewish people
don't have the right to
self-determination,
that's anti-semitic because it's holding
out Jews to a double standard. You don't
accord to other people. So, if you
believe my definition of Zionism, which
is really not my definition, it's widely
accepted. It's peculiar to me how
anti-sionism isn't the opposite of that.
How people choose to interpret it, to
embellish it, to sort of dress it up as
something other than what it is. But the
reality is if you believe if you believe
how I laid out Zionism,
then anti-ionism is pretty simple. I
think the challenge is
if someone defines their view of
anti-ionism in a way that allows for
Jews to exist in a state of Israel but
that grants Palestinians rights but
you're seeing that as anti-semitic. Um
you know people don't feel like they un
they have the space to have a a
different view without being tagged with
>> something that as we have already
established is is pretty serious. Well,
let's look in fairness, I can appreciate
that for some people this idea is an
abstraction,
right? Oh, anti-ionism, it means such
and such to me. I get that. But let me
tell you what anti-ionism doesn't mean
to me, but what it results in. It's a
lunatic
um trying to burn down the governor's
mansion with his family sleeping in it
because of his quote position on
Palestine.
It is again firebombing elderly people
because you want to quote end all
Zionists
>> in talking to people who are
selfdescribed anti-ionists.
um
starting with the idea that that is the
way that they feel that everyone should
have rights in Israel and Palestine and
Palestinian territories to then
extrapolate that they are somehow
connected to um murder arson seems
connecting those people no but
>> that's kind of a slight of hand and not
>> no but I'm I'm really not trying to do a
slight of hand I'm just trying to
understand you say that anti-ionism
leads to that is the inevitable um sort
of end to uh this kind of belief. And so
I think what people would say who might
hold those beliefs is that is a a you
know a sort of exaggeration and slight
of hand because they don't want the
annihilation of Jews.
>> They might not want that. They might not
understand what it means. They might not
be steeped in the context. They might
not be familiar with all of the history,
but all I know is what I see every day.
All I know is the thousands and
thousands of people who contact us
because they have been, as I've
described already, targeted and
victimized, not because of what they
believe, but because of who they are.
And again when you normalize language
like um you know from the river to the
sea when you normalize language like
globalizing into when you normalize
language like again Israel is a Nazi
state this create the conditions in
which people feel not just compelled but
almost obligated Lulu to do horrible
things. So I think ideas have
consequences and it starts with words.
And what I am saying to you is again
Zionism is one thing. The opposite of
that is not some well look let's have an
ideal one state where everyone is. I'm
not talking about that. I'm focused here
in America on the felt experience of
Jewish people.
I'm sure you saw my colleague Ezra
Klein's recent piece um on divisions
within the Jewish community because this
is not just an active debate uh outside
of the Jewish community. These
definitions and how they're interpreted
are also very vigorously debated within
the Jewish community.
>> Absolutely. And and in that piece, he
argues that the war in Gaza and Israel's
actions over the past year there have
broken the consensus around the central
place Israel has for American Jews. And
there was this one line in the piece
that really struck me about how we think
about the idea of self-determination.
And he writes, and I'm quoting here,
"The question is not whether Israel has
the right to exist. It is whether Israel
has the right to dominate." Israel does
exist, right? But the question is, does
Israel have the right to dominate? Which
is what has caused so much constrnation
about how Israel
exercises its right to exist.
>> So it's it's just important that I come
back to my focus really every single day
is the lived experience of Jewish people
here. So I am not someone who is opining
on the politics and the the the
geostrategic issues. That's important.
Ezra has the luxury of doing that as a
columnist. I don't.
>> The reason I delve into this is because
you brought it up when we are discussing
words like anti-ionism. At the crux of
that debate, of course, is this idea
that you believe anti-ionism means the
destruction of the Jewish state. And
other people interpret it as
the current incarnation of how Israel
expresses its right to exist over the
domination of the Palestinians. Like
again I just disagree with this I
disagree with characterizing something
with this phenomenon as something that
it isn't.
>> Okay.
>> So again so I come back to that and I
won't concede that point because I don't
think it's correct. And then secondly,
as it relates to Israel, um look, the
reality is is the country inside the
state of Israel has equal rights for its
Arab citizens, whether they are of uh
the Jews faith or the Christian faith or
the Muslim faith, whether they
selfidentify as Palestinians or Bedawins
or Arab-Israelis. You've spent a lot of
time there. you've probably
>> and I would and I would say at a
minimum, you know, there are many
examples
um of treatment that is not equitable.
And I think that's what's so hard for
many people about the clear distinction
that you're sort of making.
>> Israel is an imper it's a democracy
unlike all the other countries in the
region. It's imperfect like all
democracies on the planet, including the
one we're living in today. and we hold
it to a very high standard because it's
a democracy. We may object to certain
things, practices that that state is
doing and yet somehow people use that to
rationalize and justify actions against
American Jews. Here
>> I I don't know that any rational person
um is supporting
Jews being treated badly in America. Um
what I'm trying to understand
um is this definition here right about
what is what are these different buckets
how are they defined and then how does
that actually play out in real life in
the United States. So for example I want
to talk a little bit about the situation
on US college campuses.
>> Sure. because shortly after October 7th,
the ADL and the Brandeise Center wrote a
letter to nearly 200 universities.
Um you said that the group Students for
Justice in Palestine, which um is a
group that the ADL has um focused on, um
should be investigated for materially
supporting a foreign terrorist
organization, which can carry a penalty
of up to 20 years in prison.
So critics of that letter and that
position have said that the ADL is
trying to suppress pro Palestinian
speech because the def the definition of
material support for terrorism is
actually vague in the statutes.
>> Let's talk about it.
>> Yeah. Can you explain why why that
letter and
>> let's talk about the letter. And so just
to sort of set the stage,
>> I believe in a two-state solution.
I believe that Israelis will never truly
have safety and security unless
Palestinians also have a degree of
dignity and equality in a state of their
own. Let's just establish that. Let's
make sure that's clear. But let's talk
about SJP. So, as I mentioned earlier,
um October the 7th was this
extraordinary moment. We all went to the
office and we were there on the 8th and
all the days since. And on the ETH,
the person who runs our center on
extremism, the group at ADL, which
monitors and disrupts extremist threats,
he reached out to me and said, "Hey, you
need to see this." And one of our people
was in an SJP national chat on October
the 8th.
And um
in the chat they released or published
for people to use who are in the SJP
chat an organizing toolkit, discussion
guides in plural and talking points
about what had happened on the 7th.
Now mind you, we were literally still
trying to figure out what was going on
in the eth. I'm sure you remember you
were covering the story. There was still
fighting going on. We didn't know
exactly what had happened. who had
perpetrated it. And yet SJP on the ETH
already had their narrative very
welldeveloped. One of the things that
caught our attention on the ETH is Lulu.
They went from referring to the state of
Israel as Israel in their materials to
only referring to it as the Zionist
entity.
>> Mhm.
>> Now you know this for your audience.
Zionist entity is how the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Kamas andbalah
refer to Israel. On the ETH they talked
about terms like they used terms like
genocide to describe what was happening
in Gaza. And they also talked about they
were sort of praising what had happened
on the 7th. It was really still
happening the kind of direct conflict
with the Zionist entity.
So when we saw this this definitely got
our attention. This is not what you see
from other groups on campus. There was a
level of language here that seemed
wholesale adopted again from Hamas. And
then what we proceeded to see was uh SJP
continue to amplify and spread
narratives through their social media,
through their on the ground protests,
and use tactics that were way beyond
anything we'd ever seen before from
groups criticizing Israel on college
campuses. Well, let me ask you this
because the Supreme Court held in 2010
that that law that you asked them to be
looked into over um only applies to
actions quote performed in coordination
with and I'm quoting here at the
direction of a terrorist organization
um and not to independent advocacy. So,
are you saying that you believe those
materials came from Hamas? Well, I can
tell you that
>> directly
>> I don't know where it was coming from.
We felt like this was a group with a
pattern of behavior that already had our
attention that was clearly signal not
signaling expressing a desire to
escalate right here and we thought it
merited attention. I absolutely stand by
that. Does that mean that they're in
direct question that I don't know what
it meant was we identified again
>> but 200 schools um students
being looked into for material support
for terrorism. I mean that is a very
serious allegation that the Supreme
Court already looked at and said
basically you have to be in direct
coordination with a terrorist entity. I
mean again I'm just wondering did you
believe that that's what was happening?
the language they were using, the
tactics they were expressing support for
were in direct alignment with a
terrorist organization.
>> That is a different thing though than
actually being um directed by and in
communication with a terrorist
organization.
>> You know, we track extremists and been
doing it for decades and decades and
decades. This gives us a degree, this
gives us the ability to degree of
pattern recognition and we clearly saw
extraordinarily concerning behavior that
led us to think this needs to be looked
at. Guess what? All of our concerns have
borne out to be correct about what was
going to happen on those campuses. Since
those days, Jewish students have been
targeted, victimized, and vilified in
large part by campaigns organized and
executed by SJP. Like, that's literally
happened on our campuses. And I can go
line by line and tell you the stories of
all the individuals who've experienced
this.
>> I don't I don't want to belabor the
point. I just think it's slightly
different
what you're talking about what actually
happened on campuses and the accusation
of material support for terrorism. It's
it's those are those slightly two
different things.
>> So look on March 5th at the takeover of
the Barnard Library right here in New
York City, Quad, which is the SJP, they
banned the SJP chapter at Colombia for
its behavior and the students
immediately reconstituted it as Quad.
That's what they call it. And those
students literally handed out Hamas
literature. How do I know that? Because
I went to the campus the following
morning and the students who were there
in the library as it was taken over by
the quad students said, "Here, Jonathan,
look at what they were handing out."
Pamphlets that said Hamas media office
on it. I'll bring one to the next time
we meet so you can see it for yourself.
So, look, did Hamas send that to them?
Did they download it? I don't really
know what the process was of
coordinating, but h you can't hand out
ISIS literature, you know, in front of
low library at Colombia. You I guess you
could and you may be detained for doing
that. Is that speech or is that conduct?
In the same vein, I'd like to sort of
understand your position on Mahmud
Khalil, the Columbia University graduate
who was initially detained under a
different law um that says his actions
were a foreign policy threat and that he
can be deported because of that. Um he
is of course married to an American. He
has a green card.
The ADL supported his arrest when it
happened um posting on X. We appreciate
the Trump administration's broad, bold
set of efforts to counter campus
anti-semitism.
Again, I'm quoting. And this action
further illustrates the that resolve by
holding alleged perpetrators responsible
for their actions.
Are you comfortable with the way this
administration has been using the threat
of deportation against protesters?
>> Okay, so a few things.
First of all, like we deeply profoundly
believe as an organization that again
we've been doing civil rights for over
100 years in freedom of speech, freedom
of expression, the ability to protest
without fear of sort of political or
reprisal. This is fundamental to our
belief system. And so for me, it's not
about speech, it's about conduct.
There's lots of ways you can protest the
actions of what's happening of the
Israeli government, things in the Middle
East without using violent rhetoric or
justifying violence. Again, there's lots
of groups who do this, Lulu, who don't
use this kind of language or these
tactics.
>> I mean, I will say on on CNN, Khalil
said publicly, anti-semitism and any
form of racism has no place on campus
and in this movement. I I guess
>> when asked he wouldn't he wouldn't
condemn Hamas at the same time in that
same interview.
>> I I would ask you though,
>> yeah,
>> about again the legal repercussions for
some of these
issues over speech.
>> That that's that's I guess what I'm what
I'm asking
>> if you read the full sort of post. What
I said when Mr. Khalil was detained was
that he needed due process. And I
continue to believe he and every other
person who is detained or arrested or
all of that. Like due process is also
fundamental to our legal system.
Fundamental to
>> law though is had been very rarely used
at that point. I mean,
and this is where language becomes so
important because um at a trial which is
about his deportations and others, a
senior State Department official
testified. Student visa holders are
having their social media screened for
criticism of Israel, including the
current war in Gaza. And the State
Department official said that that is
the practice at the moment. And in his
testimony, this official said, um, and
I'm quoting, "In my understanding,
anti-semmites will sometimes try to hide
their views and say that they're not
against Jews, they're just against
Israel, which is a farcical argument."
He added, "It's just a dodge." And so,
I'm just wondering how you think this is
all being implemented. I mean, should
students not get visas if they've
criticized Israel?
>> Look, of course, that's absurd.
So what I'm focused on is not what
people think but what they do. This is
why these conversations about
anti-ionism as if we're some abstraction
are kind of problematic for me because I
deal in the reality again the lived
experience of Jewish students.
>> Sure. But I'm saying but this is a
reality of how this is now being
implemented
by policy in in this government.
>> I got to be frank. I don't know who that
State Department official was, but I
don't agree that you can keep people out
of the United States because they are
anti-Semitic or racist or sexist or
express any other prejudices. I don't
believe in this concept of thought
police. That's not what we do at ADL and
I certainly wouldn't want to see that
codified, you know, into the criminal
code. I mean, one concern that I've
heard is that,
and again referring to what the State
Department official said and the actions
of this administration, is that this
government might be using anti-semitism
selectively to screen people
um with whom it might be ideologically
opposed.
>> Well, obviously that would be a problem.
Like I don't think anti-semitism should
be used as a political football by
elected officials from either side. And
so to the extent that the Trump
administration or any administration
would use it as a pretext to uh go after
people who they don't like or with whom
they don't agree on a broader set of
issues.
>> Clearly I wouldn't agree with that.
>> All right, we're going to leave it here
because we're actually at time although
I have lots I know we've
>> this went fast.
>> This went fast. We've been in it. Um but
we're going to talk again and there's
plenty more to talk about. I really
appreciate your time.
>> Look, I appreciate your questions.
[Music]
I talked to Greenblat again and we get
into criticisms that the ADL has gotten
too close to the Trump administration.
>> Hi, nice to see you again.
>> Nice to see you again.
>> Um, you know, since we last spoke, as
you know, a lot has happened in the war
in Gaza.
And
you know, there is mounting outrage in
Israel over terrible images of one of
the hostages having to dig his own
grave. Um, looking incredibly gaunt. Um,
and we've
>> starved, I think, is the word.
>> I think starved is the word. Um, and
we've seen a mounting international
outcry that has also been voiced in
Israel over the mass starvation in Gaza.
the beloved and prominent Israeli author
David Gman has now called what's
happening to Gaza a genocide. And he
said that with immense pain and a broken
heart um that the occupation has
corrupted us. That's a quote from him.
And I I did wonder what you feel about
that characterization coming from
someone who's often seen as a moral
compass in Israel.
Well, look, I think David is an
extraordinary author and in many ways
one of the muses of the Jewish state who
sacrificed so much. I don't begrudge him
at all of his hardfelt opinions. Uh,
look, the situation in Gaza is a tragedy
of immense proportions.
The suffering, the starvation,
it is
heart-wrenching
and
like it pains me every day. I would
never purport to be a moral compass like
David Grossman. But I do feel that my
job requires me to have a kind of moral
clarity
>> and on the use of words. on the use of
words.
>> This is what we've what we've been
discussing um in different ways is is
and so I guess having heard that the
word genocide is viewed when used
against the Israeli state as basically
an attack on Israel's existence itself.
I I just wonder if if you view it that
way or if you don't.
>> Well, again, like I don't begrudge
David.
I do think what's happening in Gaza is a
terrible catastrophic situation. I don't
think it's a genocide
>> because that's a legal definition which
means an intentional effort and I don't
have the dictionary in front of me but
intentional.
>> Okay. What does it say? I mean, it's a
UN, right? We should say it's a legal
definition. And it says any of the
following acts committed with intent to
destroy in whole or in part a national,
ethnical, racial, or religious group,
such as killing members of the group,
causing serious bodily or mental harm to
members of the group, deliberately
inflicting on the group conditions of
life calculated to bring about its
physical destruction in whole or part,
imposing measures intended to prevent
births within the group, forcibly
transferring children of the group to
another group.
Well, so in fairness, I don't have that
definition in front of me, right? And I
haven't read it like you have before
this, but what I'll simply say is that
I don't believe the Israeli government
is committing genocide pl I don't think
they are intentionally trying to destroy
or annihilate a group of people. I do
think this is a war that was started by
Hamas. I do think Hamas has made the
decision to black market and the
aid that comes in. The Hamas government
has chosen to build tunnels below, not
to create protective surf structures
above. So we could ask ourselves
questions about who is really bringing
the catastrophe to the Gazin people. But
look, at the end of the day, for me,
it's not about how we define these
things. Again, we talked about this last
time. Anti-Zionism isn't an
interpretation. It's a fact. And the
pain and hunger and tragedy in Gaza is a
fact. And the deaths of civilians are a
fact. And the status of the hostages is
a fact. So the facts compel me to say
without any hesitation, this war needs
to end. The hostages need to come home.
The aid needs to flow in. And we need
people on both sides to be able to live
in some degree some of peace. That's
what I want.
The reason I I bring up the use of the
word genocide and we should also say
that you know um Ahoud Mer the former
prime minister of Israel is now calling
Israel's actions war crimes right so
again use of these words
>> is that the these questions on the words
that one uses are at the heart of what I
hear many people asking about this war
including
>> Jews which is how can they support
Zionism if this is the current manif
manifestation of Zionism.
>> Well, look, it's like how can you
support Islam if the if Ayatollah Kmeni
is the progenitor of it? How can you
support Christianity if the Crusades
happened? How can you support America if
you disagree with President Trump's
policies or even in the face of larger
scale disasters like slavery? Like, so
again, Zionism is the right of a people
to self-determination. You can be upset
with the policies of a government, but
again, if you didn't say in the wake of
enslavement of Africans, America should
be destroyed if you didn't say in the
wake of the crusades, Christianity has
no legitimacy. If you don't say in the
wake of the oppression of women for
centuries, Islam has no right, then why
would you feel differently about this?
Again, I'm only trying to I'm trying to
characterize I think what people um have
been
>> I appreciate that you are are struggling
and I'm just trying to clarify for you
why I find presentation so problematic.
>> I mean what people are um trying to
understand is how far that right to
self-determination extends.
If self-determination means having a
nation that is majority Jewish, does the
right to self-determination permit
Israel to deny others their civil and
human rights to maintain it? Well, look,
I think that's fair to it's a reasonable
question to ask. And the reality is that
people inside the state of Israel have
civil and human rights. At at the end of
the day, if you're looking for a country
anywhere in the world that gives treats
everyone perfectly, I don't think you'll
find one. If you're looking for a
country in the Middle East, a democracy
with corrective capacity, that's the
state of Israel. And the rights that are
enjoyed by minorities there, if you just
compare it to other countries in the
region, Muslims and Jews and religious
minorities have more and ethnic
minorities have more rights in Israel
than in any other country in the region.
Lulu,
>> I do want to bring the conversation back
to the US and the work that the ADL is
doing. You know, the ADL just came out
with a report rating states on how
they're doing on combating
anti-semitism. Can you talk me through
briefly why you wanted to look at
states? What was the sort of purpose of
of breaking it down in that way? Cuz I
think it's the first time you've done
it, right?
>> First time we've done it. So this Jew,
we call it the Jewish policy index. And
indeed, it takes a stateby-state view
about policies and practices to evaluate
how they are doing in the in the work of
fighting anti-semitism and hate. It's
data driven. It's grounded in evidence.
You can see that we basically tier the
states into three different categories.
Let's say okay, better and best. And we
lay out why we think they are doing as
such. Again, what are their laws? What
are their practices? What are their
policies? So that a state that is okay
can see the path forward to do better.
And it's a work in progress. My hope
would be is that over the next year and
the ensuing years, we'll work with all
of the states, again, Republicans or
Democrats, whoever might be in office,
to try to demonstrate how they can
pursue a path forward that will again
keep their Jewish citizens as safe and
secure as possible and allow them to
enjoy the same rights, the same
privileges as do all other people in
that state.
you know, on this idea of working with
both parties, the forward, which is a
progressive Jewish outlet reported a few
months ago that in a speech to
Republican attorneys general this
summer, you know, you said that student
activists were frothing at the mouth,
looking like they just came out of
Mosul. You said that there is a
convergence of what I call the radical
left and Islamist groups here in the US.
Mhm.
>> And you praised uh the Trump
administration's punishing of
universities like Harvard and others
saying, "God bless Secretary McMahon,"
referring to the Secretary of Education.
I know you made those comments in what
you consider to be a closed door meeting
um where there were Republican um
attorneys general, but is there anything
you'd like to clarify about that?
>> Absolutely.
So number one, I certainly was talking
about activists, but only those who are
completely masked, who don't show their
identity, who are dressed like other
people we've seen unfortunately on the
field of battle, and those student
activists who are screaming and
harassing and threatening other
students. So that's number one. So when
I say frothing at the mouth, I was
referring to that very small percentage
of these activists.
Number two, I also talked about um as
you said the administration's approach
to dealing with the anti-semitism
campuses and I praised Secretary McMahon
and I should say right here up front I
have worked with worked with the prior
education secretary and I've worked with
this education secretary and I credit
the Biden administration for their
national strategy to counter
anti-semitism. really important
document. No one had done what the Biden
administration had done before in
elevating anti-semitism to a federal
priority and ADL in full disclosure
worked with them on that and they get a
lot of credit for adopting the plan. And
then I give credit to the Trump
administration for actually implementing
aspects of the plan and taking a strong
view again in the face of real not
imagined real acts of hate, real acts of
discrimination. Now, that being said, I
praised Secretary McMahon in that
meeting. Maybe I went a little overboard
saying, "God bless." And at the same
time, when I met with Secretary McMahon,
I met with her in her office and told
her, "Yes, I appreciate what you're
doing on these universities leaning in.
And I'm worried about overreach because
going too far could not only, you know,
harm the universities, it harms our
whole country." And the fact of the
matter is pulling back funding for
research
uh can have lots of dilitterious
impacts. So I said to her and to the
anti-semitism task force, yes, lean in,
but don't go too far.
>> What would be a sign that this
administration has overcorrected in your
view?
>> That's a good question.
Well, I think to the extent that
research stopped happening, PhDs stopped
being granted, breakthrough innovation
was halted, those would be things that
would be evidence to me of it going too
far. Um, on the other hand, like we've
just saw the settlement with Colombia,
there was another recent settlement.
Those are encouraging because it shows
me that schools demonstrate they're
going to take this seriously and the
administration shows that they're going
to work with the and reinstate the
funding. That's a good outcome for
everybody. I think
>> I've heard the concern and the criticism
that the ADL is sort of increasingly
aligning itself with the administration,
with Israel, with the right and it's
sacrificing its long-standing commitment
to broader civil rights. I mean, in
between our two conversations, there was
a New York Magazine article that came
out sort of reflecting some of those
criticisms, which you have roundly
rejected, we should say. But I'm
wondering, do you see how the intensity
of the language you used in that meeting
could lead someone to that conclusion?
>> I mean, first of all, the piece that
you're referring to relied almost
entirely on vague anonymous sources. I'm
surprised that you're even asking me
about it. um to be honest. That being
said,
again, we helped to write the national
strategy to counter anti-semitism
released by the Biden administration. We
were deeply involved in that.
We are working as well with the Trump
administration. This is what we do. I
just don't even agree with the premise
that we are somehow aligning with the
right or aligning with the
administration. We are an institution at
ADL and one of the you know features
about being an institution is you work
with the other institutions. So I I get
and I take the feedback and I hear the
criticism and I simply would say again
we've worked with presidential
administrations over generations
right and left. We don't agree with them
on everything but where we can find
common ground we try and where we have a
point of disagreement we make that make
that known.
>> Last few questions.
>> I want to keep going. I appreciate and I
appreciate you engaging with what are
thorny and challenging questions that
are part of our national debate and I
know you've
looked at um a lot of the polling as I
have you know that Israel's lost a lot
of support even among Jews especially
among young Jews.
Do you ever worry that you might have
positioned the ADL in such a way that
the younger generation of Jews won't see
you as defending them and the things
that they believe in?
Well, it's interesting. 90% of Jews in
the polling that I've seen or the
surveys that I've seen believe in the
right of the state of Israel to exist,
i.e. they are Zionist. And so to young
Jewish people, the vast majority of them
identify with and feel positively about
their Jewish identity and have a strong
association with the state of Israel.
All the data shows this. And so I think
the majority of them from whom I've
heard appreciate the work that ADL does
for them and their communities.
So I don't really think about this
question. How have you positioned ADL?
ADL has had a core position.
>> So you think young Jews who might
self-describe as anti-ionist or have
problems with the state of Israel at the
moment, you you think that they should
>> Come on. No, but
>> Well, come on. But no, but like I have
problems with policies of the state of
Israel, but when you talk about the
young Jews who defined as anti-ionist
Lulu, like there are there are young
Hispanic people who support President
Trump's policies at the border. Okay?
There are young Hispanic people who
voted for President Trump, but the vast
majority and the mainstream
organizations fighting for the rights of
immigrants don't agree with that. But
there are some who do. There are some
who do. Look, there's blacks for Trump
and there's a whole movement among a
portion of African-Americans who deeply
believe in the president, but like would
you say to the NAACP CEO, "Why don't you
represent them?"
>> No, it's less than why did you represent
them? It's more a question of as an
organization that helps define
anti-semitism and has defined it as
anti-ionism at a moment when these
things are being debated. I mean, I hate
to come back to this, but we've seen
express that a lot of and I've heard it
from them, a lot of younger Jews, and
I've heard it from the members of the
Jewish community that calls are you
seeing like I understand anecdotally,
you may have heard it from some people,
I believe there may be a bit of a
selection bias there. Like let me ask
have you gone to any of the mainstream
synagogues like in New York City like
the ones with the largest membership and
ask them I would encourage you go to 92Y
go to the Westside JCC go to Central
Park Avenue uh road show uh all go to KJ
like go to all these large Jewish
synagogues and ask where their young
people are like again you can go to
Brooklyn and find three synagogues or by
the And I appreciate you answering the
question. I am simply from the things
that I've seen.
>> But you're giving your giving the
audience a very narrow bias if that's
where all Jewish young people.
>> I'm asking a question and you're
responding and saying that's not where
you think it is and you're not worried
about it.
>> I'm responding to the question and
saying I don't think on a day-to-day
basis how my positioning ADL. I'm
focused on defending the Jewish people
and I those who want to pontificate like
it m it must be nice this is not you
this is not you but it must be nice for
those people in the commentariat to like
have these views and so yeah I do think
it is fair to say many Jewish people are
upset about the war aspects of its
prosecution the human toll etc that
doesn't mean they think we should
eliminate the Jewish state and I think
that's the that's sort of the logic
behind your question. That's why I don't
agree with the logic, Lulu. There's so
much you get right. And I think on this,
you're just wrong.
>> You know, we we started this
conversation talking about how this is a
terrible time for American Jews, no
matter how they feel about the war. And
you know, you've spent the last 10 years
of your life focused on protecting Jews
in this country.
What do you want your audience to
understand about how they can help fight
anti-semitism?
>> Like to the ordinary person?
>> Yeah, to the ordinary person.
>> It's a good question. I deal with so
many people who are dealing with pain,
but usually it's ADL coming in to try to
help them, you know, but on a personto
person, human level,
look, I really believe in this idea of
sort of radical empathy.
and being there for others, not because
it's a quid proquo, but because it's the
right thing to do and opening your
heart. Um, so I guess what I would say
to the non-Jewish person at the
individual level is to number one, when
you see something, say something like
speak up and try to have that radical
empathy for your Jewish peer or
colleague or or friend or family member
and go to them and try to when something
happens like say something. Number two,
I think we can all educate ourselves and
get the facts. Um, and I think for me in
an environment where again young people
aren't getting their news from the times
but from Tik Tok, I think it behooves
all of us to try to be, if you will,
digitally literate, right? And so to
take sources, take information from a
variety of sources, we better understand
the issues rather than taking one source
and thinking, oh, now I know it all. And
then I think number three, like I think
showing up matters. You know, one of the
most powerful things that I did in my
job was when uh Reverend Al Sharpton and
I went down to Florida for a memorial
service after a young black woman was
shot and killed in an act of senseless
violence. And being there in that black
church kind of environment I hadn't been
in before. Um and just being present,
just showing up really mattered. And I
got lots of positive feedback from the
parishioners who probably did expect to
see the head of the ADL like sitting in
the pews for this service.
Um, showing up and so showing you we can
all show up in lots of ways, but showing
up for another community maybe in a way
that's unexpected can be incredibly a
small gesture can be incredibly
meaningful.
So I guess those are the things I would
say. speak up like learn learn the learn
the issues and show up when you can.
>> Gaza has
frayed a lot of relationships. I've seen
it, you've seen it, institutions,
governments and I'm wondering how you
look at that at the ADL because you have
been in the crux of many of these
debates and they are controversial and
they are difficult as we have seen. So
>> yeah, h
>> how do you do think an organization like
yours
>> comes out the other side of it?
>> Oh,
>> so let me break this into different
parts. So number one, we deal with
anti-semitism and I'm afraid that
>> uh the anti-semitism we've seen to rise
to such high levels. I hope and believe
it will come down. I don't know if it's
going to get back to the levels we were
at say in 2015, 2014, 2013. I worry that
increased anti-Jewish hate is now part
of the norm. I worry about that. I just
do.
>> And so we're going to have to cope with
that reality, like it or not.
>> I worry about communal ties that have
been frayed between the Jewish and
Muslim communities for sure. in
particular. I mean, so many Muslim
people, like Jewish people, are outraged
by what hap what's happened in the war,
like they were outraged by what happened
on October the 7th. And how they come
together and forge bonds, I think is
really important. Um, yeah. And I just
worry on a day-to-day basis again about
these Jewish people having a sense of
insecurity.
You know, I was just talking with a
family. You know, their Jewish child is
at summer camp. They had security drills
at the summer camp.
Like,
that's crazy.
At a Jewish summer camp, having security
drills, but they have a whole new um
what would you call it? Like protocol
because of the fear, very real fear of
threats. And I'm I worry that that's the
new norm, Lulu. that that's not going to
recede that that just that inst that
will become institutionalized.
So I do think on the other side, not
just of the war, but of this last
decade, when we've seen such a rise of
hate, when we've seen hate from
podcasters on the right and on the left,
when we've seen explicit acts of
violence, you know, from Pittsburgh to
Boulder coming from all sides. I worry
that American Jews are now living with a
kind of anxiety
that's wellounded. and the work to turn
that around, the work to get back to a
mean where Jewish people like all people
can feel safe in the places where they
worship, in the places where they work
and live. That's what I want to see us
get back to and that's going to be
really hard and I think it's going to
take a long time.
>> Jonathan Greenblat, thank you very much
for your time.
>> Thank you. I appreciate you. And look, I
know sometimes this again the
conversation can get be hard and get
heated, but I don't take any of this
personally. I hope you don't. I think
this is all professional,
>> of course.
>> And I'm I have nothing but gratitude.
Honestly, nothing but gratitude for
giving me the opportunity to to to talk
with you and to share my point of view.
So, thank you for that, Lulu. Really,
really thank
>> you for coming on. I deeply appreciate
it.
>> That's Jonathan Greenblat. We reached
out to National Students for Justice in
Palestine and Columbia University
apartheid devest. Neither group
responded to requests to comment on
Greenbat's claims about their
organizations in this interview, but SJP
has previously denied the ADL's claims
that they have provided material support
for terrorism.
[Music]